---
published: true
title: Cultural issues and opportunities
code: 1
layout: post
tags: CS3.8
category: computing
summary: The effect of computing on the world on the whole and the technological changes it brings.
---
# Technological change

## Last 5 years

+ Video streaming
+ Drones
+ Driverless cars
+ App for everthing

# Legal and ethical issues

## Legal issues

**Legal issues** are those that are forbidden by laws. Examples:

+ Infringing copyright by downloading a music video without payment.

## Ethical issues

**Ethical issues** determine people's moral principles. Examples:

+ Downloading Youtube videos as MP3s.
+ Installing illegal copies of software.
+ Straming movies / tv without paying a subscription.

# Use and misuse of personal data

**Personal data** is anything unique to you, such as your name, address, debit card details etc. There are an awful lot of organisations that collect and hoard people's personal data, including:

+ Income and debts
+ Relationship status
+ Health
+ Employment status
+ Religious views
+ Political views

This is an issue because:

+ Our **Personal Privacy** is infringed as we never give explicit consent for a lot of forms.
+ **Data Security** - how much of the data we use can be guranteed to be secure?
+ **Misuse of Data** - this is the use of data collected for one thing for something else.
+ **Surveillance by government** - this is the government's monitoring of phone calls, messages, data etc. in order to be able to monitor people.
+ **Online profile** - you have to be careful about your privacy settings as your posts on social networks aren't deleted with time.
+ **Profiling** - lots of organisations use their accumulated data to build profiles about people based on their history.

# Code of Conduct
A **code of conduct** is a set of rules stating what is acceptable and what isn't acceptable to do with their computer systems. Breaching this could get you fired, banned from computers or similar. Most of these cover, according to the **British Computer Society**:

+ Operate in public interest
+ Hold duty to organisation / college
+ Hold duty to profession
+ Maintain professional competence as well as integrity.

# Legislation

+ The **Computer Misuse Act 1990** deals with use of computers with malicious intent, and it deals with:
	* Unauthorised access to computer programs or data
    * Unauthorised access with further criminal intent
    * Unauthorised modification of computer material
+ The **Regulations of Investigatory Powers Act** deals with:
	* Allows employers to track employees
	* Interception of communications (via packet sniffing)
    * Investigation of encrypted electronic data
+ The **Consumer Protection Act** protects consumers and protects their rights in buying goods and services.
+ The **Data Protection Act** protects the privacy of personal data when used in information technology. It states that data must be:
	* Fairly and lawfully processed
    * Processed for limited purposed
    * Adequate, relevant and not excessive
    * Accurate
    * Not kept longer than necessary
    * Processed in accordance to data subject's rights
    * Secure
    * Not transferred to countries without adequate data protection.
+ The **Copyrights, Designs and Patents Act**
+ The **Telecommunications Regulations Act**